Faster Firmware Builds (#79)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/faster-builds.md

  anti-virus software. I've seen 2-3x slowdowns without the exclusion.
- Use the newest set of compilers and tools that you can reasonably use.
- Ensure incremental builds only compile the minimal set of files (the build
  shouldn't require a "clean" before each "build").
- Ensure no timestamps are injected into the build which would force rebuilds.
- Try not to enable link-time optimizations (LTO) as the linking step sometimes
  becomes as slow as the entire build itself! If you have enabled it due to code
  size constraints, I suggest checking out Interrupt's
  [code size posts](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/tag/fw-code-size) for
  easy wins.

## Example Build Environment

To put these suggestions to the test, I took the example
LwIP_HTTP_Server_Netconn_RTOS from STM32CubeF4 project[^4], found a GCC
port[^10], and used that to test the various operating systems, compilers, and
build systems. To easily get the same environment locally, one can clone the
project from the Interrupt repository and perform the appropriate steps for each
compiler.

```
$ git clone git@github.com:memfault/interrupt.git
$ cd interrupt/example/faster-compilation
```

> > Make will automatically download the STM32CubeF4 and extract it to the

Author: I removed ccache. Thanks!

ensure you and the entire team are using it.

Below are some times recorded compiling the example project with GCC and
different thread counts.

![comparison of compiler build times with GCC threads](/img/faster-compilation/gcc-threads-build-time-comparison.svg)

With Make, it is as simple as invoking Make with the argument `-j` or `-jN`,
where `N` is the number of desired threads to use. If you or your team members
occasionally forget to pass in this parameter, I suggest wrapping the command
using Invoke, as I wrote about in my [Building a CLI for Firmware
Projects]({% post_url 2019-08-27-building-a-cli-for-firmware-projects %}#adding-parallel-builds)
post.

If you are using Make in a recursive manner, **make sure** you are using
`$(MAKE)` instead of `make` when using it in a rule, as follows:

```make
# GOOD
somerule:
	$(MAKE) -C subdir

# BAD
somerule:
	make -C subdir
```

If you passed in `-j4 --output-sync=recurse` as arguments to your initial Make
call, these will also be passed through to future `$(MAKE)` calls. In the second
`# BAD` example above, they will not be propagated and Make will run `somerule:`

> in a single thread.

Author: Gahh, there's already too much in that section. I'll leave it to the makefile blog post we'll eventually publish

### Use A Faster Compiler

Some compilers are faster than others. The build times of our example project
shown below were calculated by taking the average time among 5 builds for each
setup.

![comparison of compiler build times](/img/faster-compilation/all-compilers-build-time-comparison.svg)

GCC for macOS, Linux, and Windows performed the best regardless of operating
system, coming in just under 10 seconds. ARM Compiler 6 with Keil then IAR
followed close behind. Keil with ARM Compiler 5 (armcc) was _much_ slower. If
you are using armcc, I'd try to upgrade ASAP.

### ccache - Compiler Cache

> NOTE: This is trivial to set up when using GCC + Make. It might be more

> > difficult or impossible with other build systems.

Author: Yeah, it's possible with armclang, I just tried to duck out of that task of figuring it out.

ccache[^1] is a compiler cache that speeds up recompilation. It compares the
input files and compilation flags to any previous inputs it has previously
compiled, and if there is a match, it will pull the compiled object file from
its cache and provide that instead of recompiling the input. It is useful when
switching branches often and in CI systems where subsequent builds are very
similar. It's not uncommon to see 10x speedups for large projects.

> ![comparison of compile build times with ccache](/img/faster-compilation/ccache-build-time-comparison.svg)

Author: Google Sheets!

> ![comparison of compile build times with ccache](/img/faster-compilation/ccache-build-time-comparison.svg)

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1041679/74263600-fdd9fc80-4cb3-11ea-9821-8adeacccbae6.png)

```
$ ccache arm-none-eabi-gcc <args>
```

ccache can be installed using in the following ways for each operating system:

- macOS - [Brew](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/ccache) or
  [Conda](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/ccache)
- Linux - [Apt](https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/bionic/+package/ccache) or
  [Conda](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/ccache)
- Windows -
  [Github nagayasu-shinya/ccache-win64](https://github.com/nagayasu-shinya/ccache-win64)

I suggest **against** the commonly suggested way of symlinking your compilers to
the `ccache` binary and instead to set up your build system in the following
way:

```make
ARM_CC    ?= arm-none-eabi-gcc
CC_PREFIX ?= ccache
CC        ?= $(CC_PREFIX) $(ARM_CC)

%.o : %.c
	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c -o $@ $<
```

With this setup, your environment remains simple and developers only need to
install ccache with no further setup.

You can easily check whether ccache is set up properly using the following steps
and verifying there are "cache hits".

```
# This initial build with populate the cache
$ make
...

# Clear ccache stats
$ ccache --zero-stats

# Run the build again (most artifacts should be cached)
$ make
...

> # Ensure ccache had some hits

Author: Nice, fixed.

`.c` file, you can use GCC's `-MMD` flag to print out intermediate `.d` files
for us during the compilation. These files are usually used as an input to Make
for auto dependency generation[^7], but we can also look at them by hand.

I've published the
[AWS FreeRTOS nRF52830 list.d file](https://gist.github.com/tyhoff/a7028c60f8e0db1a548d3f236967109f)
in a Github Gist.

Next time, before including that extra header file, especially _to another
header file_, think twice.

#### Exploring Header Dependency Graphs

Rather than just thinking twice before adding a header file, there are tools
(albeit not great ones) you can use to explore dependency graphs. I won't
explain them here as I have found
[this post by Gernot Klingler on the topic](http://gernotklingler.com/blog/open-source-tools-examine-and-adjust-include-dependencies/)
to be a really good resource on the topic.

The primary way I dig into dependency issues is by investigating GCC's `.d`
files that it produces and look for repeated trees of includes. If you find that
every file in your firmware includes FreeRTOS or standard peripheral headers,
there are probably issues to fix.

> One tool I would be wary of using or investing time in is IWYU (Include What You

Author: Actually wasn't trying for the link. I switched things around so it makes more sense.

The bad news is that if you are using Make, there isn't a great way to do
profiling. My ultimate suggestion would be to just not use Make and opt for
something more modern. Bazel and CMake are good options. However, continue
reading if you want a couple of hacks for profiling build steps with Make.

### Profiling Individual Make Build Rules

The easiest way to add timing information to compilation steps is to prepend the
`time` command to the desired rules. For instance, if we wanted to profile each
call to `$(CC)`, we could do something like

```make
CC = time arm-none-eabi-gcc
```

or

```make
%.o : %.c
	time $(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c -o $@ $<

```

> NOTE: When using parallel builds in Make, the logging output can get
> scrambled. My advice is to ensure you are using a newer version of GNU Make
> and the `--output-sync=recurse` command line option[^13].

### Profiling Every Make Build Rule

If you want to profile _every_ build rule in your Makefile, a
[clever approach](http://alangrow.com/blog/profiling-every-command-in-a-makefile)
is to override the `SHELL` Make variable with a timing script.

It produces a lot of noise, but it may help you discover slow steps in the
build.

> 

Reviewer: fwiw, If you are trying to figure out why so much is triggering for an incremental rebuild, I think the output from `make --debug=basic` can also be helpful

---
title: "Improving Compilation Time of Embedded Projects"
description:
  "Strategies for speeding up C/C++ compile times for embedded software projects
  using ccache, preprocessor optimizations, parallel execution, and other
  techniques."
tag: [better-firmware]
author: tyler
image: /img/faster-compilation/faster-builds-ccache-comparison.png
---

We've all likely worked on a software or firmware project where the build takes
a "coffee break" amount of time to complete. It's become such a common
occurrence that there is an infamous [xkcd comic](https://xkcd.com/303/) related
to the matter.

<!-- excerpt start -->

> Build times don't have to be slow, even yours! However, many factors play a

Author: I just got shown up on my English. Love it!

  `armclang` is ARM Compiler 6.13
- IAR: IAR Embedded Workbench for ARM 8.42.1 on Windows
- GCC: GNU ARM Embedded Toolchain 8-2019-q3[^9] for macOS, Linux, and Windows

The operating system environments were as follows:

- Windows: a VirtualBox image of Windows 10 was used, with 8GB RAM and 4 CPU
- Linux: Ubuntu 18.04 on Docker, with 8GB RAM and 4 CPU
- macOS: 10.14 Mojave native installation, 16GB RAM and 4 CPU.

## Steps Towards Faster Builds

### Parallel Compilation

The first and easiest thing to do to speed up builds is ensure you are building
with multiple threads. Make, IAR, and Keil all support parallel compilation, so
ensure you and the entire team have enabled this.

Below are some times recorded compiling the example project with GCC and
different thread counts.

![comparison of compiler build times with GCC threads](/img/faster-compilation/gcc-threads-build-time-comparison.svg)

With Make, it is as simple as invoking Make with the argument `-jN`, where `N`
is the number of desired threads to use. If you or your team members
occasionally forget to pass in this parameter, I suggest wrapping the command
[using

> Invoke]({% post_url 2019-08-27-building-a-cli-for-firmware-projects %}#adding-parallel-builds)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Invoke]({% post_url 2019-08-27-building-a-cli-for-firmware-projects %}#adding-parallel-builds).
```

> If you are using Make in a recursive manner, **make sure** you are using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are calling Make from a Makefile, verify that you are using
```

- Wasn't sure what you meant with "recursive manner" with it until I saw the example.
- The change to "verify" because there's too much "make" it that sentence already.
- I would drop the emphasis on just verbs without objects (there are other cases in this post) as it just adds visual noise. If you really need it, consider emphasising the whole action (similarly to how you should do it for links):

> If you are calling Make from a Makefile, **verify that you are using `${MAKE)` instead of `make`** when using it in a rule

Author: You are right. I need to adjust how I transcribe about these things from my mind and instead use better written language.

`$(MAKE)` instead of `make` when using it in a rule, as follows:

```make
# GOOD
somerule:
	$(MAKE) -C subdir

# BAD
somerule:
	make -C subdir
```

If you passed in `-j4 --output-sync=recurse` as arguments to your initial Make

> call, these will also be passed through to future `$(MAKE)` calls. In the second

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
call, they will also be passed through to future `$(MAKE)` calls. In the second
```

$ ccache --show-stats
cache directory                     /Users/tyler/.ccache
primary config                      /Users/tyler/.ccache/ccache.conf
secondary config      (readonly)    /usr/local/Cellar/ccache/3.7.3/etc/ccache.conf
stats updated                       Mon Feb 10 23:24:26 2020
stats zeroed                        Mon Feb 10 23:24:18 2020
cache hit (direct)                     0
cache hit (preprocessed)              75
cache miss                             0
cache hit rate                    100.00 %
called for link                        4
can't use precompiled header           1
cleanups performed                     0
files in cache                      8521
cache size                         197.0 MB
max cache size                       5.0 GB
```

As you can see above, I had a 100% cache hit rate on a rebuild!

> If you have a _very_ large project, I've heard good things about icecc[^2] and
> sccache[^3], but these are generally for projects with thousands of large
> files and many developers.

### Optimizing Header Includes and Dependencies

This (large) section goes into how to clean up and optimize dependencies between
your source files and headers.

> #### Large Files = Problem

Reviewer 2: More concrete via: Problem -> "Slow Builds"?

Generally speaking, the larger the input file into the compiler is, the longer

> it will take to compile. If the compiler is fed a file with 10 lines, it might

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it will take to compile. If the compiler is fed a file of 10 lines, it might
```

take 10 ms to compile, but with 5000 lines, it might take 100 ms.

One step that happens before a file is compiled is "preprocessing". A
preprocessor takes all `#include "file.h"` statements and replaces them with the
_entire contents_ of the file being included, and does this recursively. This
means that a `.c` file as small as the following could wind up being 5000+ lines
of code for the compiler!

```c
// extra.c

#include "stm32f4xx.h"

char *extra(void) {
  return "extra";
}
```

We can check the contents of the preprocessed (post-processed) file by calling
`gcc` with the `-E` flag.

```
$ arm-none-eabi-gcc -E -g -Os ... -c src/extra.c > preprocessed.txt
$ cat preprocessed.txt | wc -l
    5397
```

> It turns out that the header file `stm32f4xx.h` and all of _its_ included header

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It turns out that the header file `stm32f4xx.h` and its transitively included header
```

Prefer words over visual styling for better reading flow

Author: Love that word choice. I couldn't figure out a good one so opted for emphasis.

above:

<p align="center">
  <img width="600" src="/img/faster-compilation/aws-freertos-nrf52-dependencies.svg" alt="AWS FreeRTOS nrf52 config dependency issues" />
</p>

You can see that, while the `FreeRTOSConfig.h` header should have little to no
dependencies, it ultimately includes 30 other header files along with it.

If we take the FreeRTOS linked list implementation file `FreeRTOS/list.c` and
compile it, it will now include _all_ of those headers mentioned above, which
include the vendor and hardware specific files. A file that should take no more
than 50 ms to compile now takes roughly 500 ms on my machine!

To investigate for yourself which headers are recursively included for a single
`.c` file, you can use GCC's `-MMD` flag to print out intermediate `.d` files
for us during the compilation. These files are usually used as an input to Make
for auto dependency generation[^7], but we can also look at them by hand.

I've published the
[AWS FreeRTOS nRF52830 list.d file](https://gist.github.com/tyhoff/a7028c60f8e0db1a548d3f236967109f)
in a Github Gist.

Next time, before including that extra header file, especially _to another
header file_, think twice.

> #### Quick Find Large Files and Dependency Chains

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Find Large Files and Dependency Chains Quickly
```

   forward declaration.

   ```c
   // settings_file.h

   typedef struct File File;

   bool settings_file_open(File *file);
   ```

   If you find yourself needing to forward declare this more than once, I
   suggest creating a header file `filesystem_types.h` which contains these
   declarations. Now other files can include this new `_types.h` header instead.

   ```c
   // filesystem_types.h

   typedef struct File File;

   // Other forward declarations
   ```

3. Use [include guards](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Include_guard). I suggest
   using `#pragma once` since it is less error prone and is quite portable[^14].
   The standard C way works too.
4. Wrap third party library code in an abstraction layer so its internal types
   and headers do not leak where they do not belong. Vendors are not in the
   business of clean and quick compiling code, and you shouldn't be at the mercy
   of their bad habits.

On a previous project, the most significant patch I made related to header
dependencies resulted in a compilation speedup of 30%. Before the change, almost
every file in our firmware project had incidentally included the entire set of

> our vendor's peripheral library header files, which are usually **huge**. Each

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
our vendor's peripheral library header files, which are usually huge. Each
```

Huge is already a huge word, no need to make it huger. 😬

> `.c` file was accidentally including 600+ headers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`.c` file was accidentally including more than 600 headers.
```

The fix was to create a couple of `..._types.h` files which contained forward
declarations to help break the dependencies between our code and vendor code.

### Pre-compiled headers

> > NOTE: This is a GCC/Clang only feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> NOTE: This is a GCC/Clang-only feature.
```

After cleaning up all of the header dependency issues that you can find, there
may still be some headers that you can't avoid including everywhere, and they
are slowing down your build. The good news is that there is a way to pre-compile
your headers with GCC[^12].

Pre-compiling a header means that the compiler will only need to compile a
header _once_, and whenever it is included by other files, it will reuse the
built object. It compiles the header into an intermediate file with the
extension `.h.gch`. If the location of these files is added as an include path
when compiling (before the real headers), GCC will use the pre-compiled versions
instead.

Let's go over the easiest way to do this in GCC, one that doesn't require you to
re-architect your project.

> 1. Create a header file `precompiled.h` and place it in your source tree.

Reviewer 2: If possible, try to avoid the numbered list and code snippets for more visual zen.

> Create a header file precompiled.h and place it in your source tree. Add a rule to compile this header, just as you would with a `.c` file. It should be built before building the `.c` or `.cpp` files. Then include this file using a CFLAG argument `-include <>` when compiling the `.c` files. With Make, this looks something like:
>
> ```
> PRECOMPILED_H := "precompiled.h"
> PRECOMPILED_H_OBJ := $(PRECOMPILED_H).gch
> 
> %.h.gch: $(PRECOMPILED_H)
> 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c -o $@ $<
>
> %.o : %.c | $(PRECOMPILED_H_OBJ)
> 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -include $(PRECOMPILED_H) -c -o $@ $<
>  ```
